Storage Profiles and Host Modes
===============================

DASObjectStore is being extended beyond appliance-only storage. A deployment
profile describes the backend boundary of one ObjectStore:

* ``folder`` exposes one explicitly bounded directory;
* ``drive`` exposes one validated non-rotational SSD mount; and
* ``appliance`` uses the managed SSD/HDD placement model.

Host mode is a separate axis. ``per_user`` is intended for a user-owned local
service, ``system`` for a package-managed service, and ``integrated`` for a
host product such as Mnemosyne or Synoptikon. Existing store metadata is not
silently rewritten when these contracts evolve; profile creation, adoption,
capacity limits, and migration rules remain gated campaign work.

All profiles retain daemon-owned catalogue and ingress authority. A folder or
drive is not a license for direct writes that bypass manifests, checksums,
quota reservations, or durable finalization. The folder profile must be size
bounded, and all profiles will eventually expose the same logical capacity and
admission semantics through CLI, Web, S3, and product adapters.

The first local backend implementation is available to daemon-side tests as
``FolderBackend``. It reserves logical bytes before staging, computes SHA-256
while reading, writes only beneath the private ``.dasobjectstore`` namespace,
syncs the file and destination directory, then renames atomically. Enumerated
records retain the same nested, relative catalogue location as finalized
objects, while the private namespace remains hidden from user-tree inspection.
Hard-linked user files are reported as unsafe, and file-based adoption uses a
post-copy checksum check so a changing source is not silently accepted.
The regression suite includes a deterministic post-read mutation hook; generic
stream staging remains intentionally unable to promise a stable source-file
version without the file-specific import helper.
Managed-object enumeration and verification compare the open file identity and
stable size/timestamps with the path after hashing; staged files are rechecked
before rename and failed validation leaves the reservation recoverable.
Catalogue registration and user-facing profile creation still require the
subsequent daemon contract and explicit adoption workflow.

The private ``.dasobjectstore`` namespace and its object/staging descendants
are tightened to owner-only ``0700`` permissions on Unix, and staged/finalized
payload files use ``0600``. The user-selected folder root is never chmod'ed;
group-based tools must use daemon APIs rather than traversing private payloads
directly.

Per-user host mode derives state beneath ``XDG_STATE_HOME`` or
``$HOME/.local/state/dasobjectstore``. Runtime sockets use
``XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/dasobjectstore`` when provided; offline folder operations may
run without a runtime directory, but socket resolution fails explicitly rather
than falling back to shared ``/tmp``. System and integrated modes retain the
packaged daemon state/runtime roots. Directory ownership, permissions, and user
service installation remain deployment-layer responsibilities.

For local validation, set
``DASOBJECTSTORE_CODEX_VALIDATION_ROOT=/Users/stephen/.dasobjectstore-codex-validation``
when running the folder backend tests. They create only a uniquely named child
with generated bytes and remove that child after each test; never point this
variable at user or project data.

If a test process is interrupted, remove only generated validation children with
the documented safe command::

   find /Users/stephen/.dasobjectstore-codex-validation -maxdepth 1 -type d \( -name 'dasobjectstore-folder-backend-*' -o -name 'dasobjectstore-drive-backend-*' \) -prune -exec rm -rf -- {} +

The shared policy contract now carries a logical limit, backend reserve, and
warning/critical thresholds. Its reservation ledger admits bytes transactionally
before an upload and commits or releases the reservation after durable
finalization. Existing appliance policies remain explicitly unbounded until an
operator performs a compatibility-aware capacity migration.

Admission derives whether SSD staging is required from the typed ingress origin.
External origins always resolve to SSD-first; policy-permitted direct
server-local origins may bypass only the SSD-free constraint. Logical quota,
backend reserve, copy amplification, and backend capacity remain mandatory in
both routes. A client cannot override the origin-derived decision.

Quota reductions never delete data. The core ledger can enter an explicit
``over_quota`` pressure state while preserving reads and existing reservations;
new reservations are rejected until usage is remediated. Deletion accounting
and daemon/backend policy wiring remain part of the capacity integration gate.
Verified folder deletion now debits the logical ledger only after stable-file
validation and removes no hard-linked or changed object. The private folder
catalogue is updated before payload unlinking; catalogue failures leave the
payload and accounting untouched, while unlink failures restore the catalogue
record so retries remain authoritative. Shared SQLite/object-service catalogue
integration remains a separate gate.
Folder staging also requires the copied byte count to equal its reservation,
so logical usage cannot drift from the payload size.
The core ledger also exposes a schema-versioned snapshot/restore boundary for
restart-safe persistence. Unknown schemas and snapshots that would overbook a
policy are rejected; the daemon still needs to supply durable file persistence
and stale-reservation expiry.
The daemon persistence wrapper writes this snapshot through a private temporary
file, file ``fsync``, atomic rename, and directory ``fsync``; corrupt or
future-schema state is rejected without silently resetting reservations.

The daemon API now has a transport-neutral capacity admission contract. It
returns an explicit admitted/rejected decision, stable rejection reason, quota
and reservation observations, and optional SSD-staging observations for direct
ingress. Live store inventory and mutation routes still need to supply the
daemon-owned observations before this contract can authorize uploads.

The daemon contract also provides a ledger-backed evaluation path: logical
usage and outstanding reservations are read from the daemon's reservation
ledger, while backend and SSD free-space values come from daemon-owned probes.
Folder inspection can now also produce a durable-planner-ready reconciliation
manifest for unmanaged regular files. This remains read-only: unsafe entries
stay report-only, user files are not adopted, and an explicit product adoption
decision is still required before authority changes.
Checkpointed plans carry a stable source revision (file identity and metadata on
Unix, size/mtime fallback elsewhere). Complete or in-progress work is reused
only when that revision matches; changed or legacy revision-less entries safely
restart from a fresh download action.
The caller cannot replace those logical observations with request data. Atomic
reservation mutation and live S3/multipart route wiring remain follow-up work.
The response also carries raw backend free space, configured warning/critical
thresholds, and copy-amplification basis points so presentation adapters can
show the daemon's decision without rebuilding capacity policy locally.
The daemon also exposes an evaluate-and-reserve helper that uses the validated
client request ID as the reservation key; rejected requests do not mutate the
ledger. HTTP/S3/multipart transport routes still need to call this primitive.
An authenticated, read-only daemon transport route now carries this decision
contract over the normal Unix-socket boundary. It authorizes the store reader
before consulting the orchestrator and returns ``capacity_admission_unavailable``
until live ledger and filesystem probes are installed; it never treats a
synthetic response as an admission.
The packaged daemon now installs a registry-backed provider that owns these
observations: it restores each bounded store's persisted ledger, probes mounted
backend/SSD free space with ``statvfs``, and fsync-persists admitted
reservations. A bounded store without an initialized ledger, an unavailable
probe, or a failed persistence write remains unavailable rather than being
admitted with guessed usage.
The provider also requires the requested copy count to match the daemon's
store policy; callers cannot reduce redundancy through the admission request.
Reservations have explicit daemon-owned ``commit`` and ``release`` lifecycle
operations. A failed durable update restores the prior ledger snapshot; upload
workers must retain the reservation ID until their catalogue outcome is known.
The daemon-owned remote S3 transfer worker now uses the remote job ID as that
reservation ID: it admits before starting the byte-transfer adapter, then
commits on successful transfer and catalogue completion or releases on any
failure. Capacity rejection is recorded as a failed daemon job rather than
silently running an unbounded transfer. Multipart adapters still need to adopt
the same lifecycle before bounded profiles are enabled for that path.
Local file ingest now uses the same daemon provider boundary per non-skipped
object: admission occurs before source/staging or direct-HDD work, durable
settlement commits the reservation, and failures release outstanding IDs. Dry
runs and skipped existing objects never reserve. S3 reconciliation now passes
the controller-owned provider through the staged-download worker;
multipart adapters still need explicit provider injection before that path is
considered quota-complete.
When daemon capacity admission is enabled, local ingest rejects a copy-count
override that differs from the ObjectStore policy before reading source data;
the daemon remains authoritative for redundancy accounting.
Reservation IDs include the client request identity when supplied, otherwise a
stable source-path digest, so unrelated same-second jobs cannot collide while
retries of the same source remain deterministic.
The core ledger has a concurrent reservation regression: simultaneous callers
contending for a bounded quota cannot overbook logical capacity. Crash/restart
reservation persistence, multipart expiry, dedupe accounting, and full-disk
fixtures remain separate integration work.

Portable manifests identify a profile with a versioned backend reference:
folder manifests store a canonical root identity, drive manifests store stable
filesystem/device identities plus an optional mount hint, and appliance
manifests reference a pool. A path hint is never treated as the backend
identity, and an explicit migration/adoption step is required before writing a
manifest for an existing store.

Drive manifests must declare ``media: ssd`` and stable filesystem/device
identities. A mount path is only a hint for local probing; a name such as
``/Volumes/SSD`` is never accepted as evidence that the device is non-rotational.
The platform crate now validates injected observations without touching a real
device: media must be positively SSD, identities must match the manifest, the
mount must be non-root and writable, and system-root status must be confirmed
safe. Host-specific diskutil/lsblk observation and daemon adoption remain
future integration work.

The daemon now has a guarded drive backend that retains the drive manifest and
delegates the hardened folder engine for hierarchy, checksums, atomic durable
finalization, verification, and bounded capacity. A runtime guard is checked
before filesystem operations so an unmounted or identity-drifted SSD cannot be
treated as an ordinary directory; host-specific guard implementations remain
future work.
Drive capacity snapshots and read-only user-tree inspection are exposed through
the same guarded boundary; SMART/NVMe endurance and live device inventory are
hardware-dependent follow-up work.

Protection is independent of the profile: manifests may require ``local_only``,
``reproducible``, ``externally_replicated``, or ``appliance_protected`` policy.
The physical backend does not silently choose a protection promise; product
adapters must request and validate one explicitly.

Compatibility and migration rules
---------------------------------

Portable manifests are versioned contracts. The current schema is version 1;
unknown or future versions are rejected rather than guessed or silently
rewritten. Existing appliance metadata and legacy policy files are never
interpreted as a folder or drive manifest. An explicit adoption or migration
operation must validate the backend identity, host mode, protection policy, and
capacity policy before writing a new manifest. Drive mount hints may become
stale and are only local probe hints; filesystem and device identities are the
authority. A future schema migration must be additive, versioned, and tested
before it can write persistent metadata.

All profiles implement the same backend capability boundary: validation,
reservation, staging, durable finalization, reads, enumeration, verification,
health, reconciliation, and removal. A profile may report an unsupported
capability explicitly; callers must not assume appliance-only placement methods
exist for folder or drive stores.

Product capability discovery
----------------------------

The daemon API exposes a versioned static profile-capability catalogue for
Mnemosyne and standalone clients. It describes profile maturity, supported host
modes and protection policies, backend operations, service capabilities, and
requirements such as bounded capacity or dedicated SSD media. It does not
contain mount paths, device IDs, credentials, free-space observations, or a
claim that a configured store is healthy; runtime readiness remains a separate
store-inventory contract. It also states only the static local failure-domain
ceiling: folder and drive are one domain, while appliance may represent up to
three local copies. This is not a current placement or external-replication
promise.
Clients can request this catalogue through the typed daemon
``profile_capabilities`` command. The response is deliberately static and safe
for feature gating; runtime readiness and provisioning still require the
profile-specific daemon workflows.
The CLI exposes the same contract through ``dasobjectstore store capabilities``
(``--json`` is available for automation); it does not bypass daemon authority
or claim that an appliance is reachable.

Product-owned policy templates
------------------------------

The core contract ``StoragePolicyTemplate`` is the adapter boundary for a
Synoptikon, Mneion, Mnemosyne, standalone, or package-managed product. A
template names its owning product and stable template ID, then carries the
profile, host mode, protection policy, finite logical capacity, local-copy
count, and typed ingress origin. New templates are fail-closed: IDs are
lowercase ASCII slugs, capacity thresholds must validate, and the logical
limit is mandatory. Folder and drive profiles cannot claim more than one
local copy because each has one local failure domain; appliance templates may
request up to three local copies.

The template does not contain a path, credential, provider endpoint, or
provisioning command. Its typed ingress origin exposes whether SSD-first
staging is required, but daemon admission remains authoritative. Product
adapters still own their defaults, authorization, provisioning, and any
external replication policy; those adapters are not inferred from a profile
name.

The Mnemosyne adapter crate now provides a strict versioned envelope for this
boundary. An adapter can validate that a template is owned by its product and
forward the request without adding defaults or filesystem/provider details.
Synoptikon, Mneion, Mnemosyne, and standalone provisioning implementations
remain responsible for their own product decisions.

Profile promotion uses an explicit resumable state contract: planned, copying,
destination verified, retirement pending, completed, or failed. Source
placement remains retained through verification and is released only after an
explicit retirement confirmation. The state machine does not itself copy files
or mutate stores; it now has atomic schema-versioned checkpoint save/load with
strict source-retention invariants, while daemon workers and profile adapters
remain required. The daemon now has a folder-to-folder worker for local
validation: it verifies the source, reserves destination capacity, streams and
durably finalizes the object, verifies the destination checksum, and stops at
``retirement_pending``. Failed finalization does not silently delete staged
data or release its reservation, so an operator or retry worker can recover it.
The same worker can target the guarded dedicated-SSD drive backend; drive
identity validation runs before any filesystem operation. Appliance placement
adapters and catalogue transaction wiring remain separate integration work.
